I think you have not reached the point where you can distinguish between a normal ECG and an abnormal ECG
So now we can finally discuss how do identify specific causes of ECG abnormalities
Starting with super ventricular arrhythmias
The next few sections will have a lot of ECGs and clinical relevance
Supra ventricular arrhythmias are abnormalities in the electrical conduction system
That occur Above The ventricle
Meaning with an SA node Atria or AV node
Although the atrium may be going crazy and supraventricular arrhythmias
The impulses are usually still funneled through the AV node and activate the normal rapid his purkinje system
So the QRS complex in supraventricular arrhythmias
Is usually not prolonged
This is calling narrow complex
In contrast
Ventricular arrhythmias usually bypass to normal his purkinje system and spread throughout the ventricles via slow my
Last Light to my site spread
This causes a prolonged QRS
Call they wide comp
We will focus on sinus bradycardia sinus tachycardia
Atrial fibrillation atrial flutter
Wolff-parkinson-white syndrome and avrt and avnrt
First let's talk about sinus bradycardia
Since it has the word sinus in it
You know that the impulse originates within the SA node and should follow all the standard criteria of a sinus rhythm
Such as every P wave is followed by QRS
Ever QRS
Preceded by a p-wave
And the P wave is upright in leads 1 and 2
But sinus bradycardia occurs when the SA node Fires at a rate less than 60 beats per minute
Sinus bradycardia is often asymptomatic but if severe
Can cause a drop in cardiac output that causes lightheadedness or sink
Many people have sinus bradycardia when they're sleeping which is normal
Athletes may have chronic sinus bradycardia due to increased vagal tone
Aside from these benign reasons there are many causes of pathologic sinus bradycardia
Medication effects
Should be in early consideration when determining the cause of sinus bradycardia
Possible culprits include beta blockers
Non dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
Digitalis
Sedatives
An opioid
Another causes sick sinus syndrome
Which is where a dysfunctional SA node causes bradycardia
And this is usually seen in older patients
A stomach can cause sinus bradycardia
The right coronary artery supplies blood to the SA node and AV node in the majority of patients
If the RCA is occluded during a stemi
There can be SA node and AV node ischemia which can lead to bradycardia or heart block respectively
Sinus bradycardia and complete heart block during an MRI are usually transient
And resolved within 24 hours
Increase vagal activity can be caused by valsalva maneuver
Coughing or carotid massage
And any brain pathology that increases intracranial pressure
Can cause bradycardia is part of the Cushing reflex of hypertension bradycardia and bradypnea
The bradycardia is due to increased vagal tone
As a physiological correlate
Vagal stimulation leads to increase acetylcholine released onto the SA node
This activates GI coupled muscarinic receptors
Is causing a decrease in cyclic GMP
Which decreases the SA node the pacemaker
Acetylcholine also activates acetylcholine gated potassium channels
Annie Fox
Potassium hyperpolarizes the SA node
Also causing a decrease
Pacemaker
Other causes of sinus bradycardia include hypothyroidism hypothermia
Hypoxia
Anorexia nervosa
Obstructive sleep apnea
Or certain infection
The most important treatment in sinus bradycardia is to identify and correct the underlying cause
The gold standard medication for symptomatic sinus bradycardia is at
Japan giving us half a milligram IV push every 3 to 5 minutes
Atropine is a muscarinic antagonist
So it blocks the effect of acetylcholine on the SA node
Which we just discussed
This will increase the heart rate
What should improve cardiac output
Other medications used for sinus bradycardia include epinephrine dopamine or glucagon
Refractory cases it may be necessary to Pace the heart using transcutaneous or transvenous pacemaker
But always remember
Patient must have
If a patient sleep and you notice that the monitor shows a heart rate of 50
Please don't push atropine
Now we should talk about sinus tachycardia
Again this Rhythm originates
An SA node
So it must meet all the requirements of a sinus rhythm
Sinus tachycardia is
Is extremely common and can be a normal physiological response
When you go for a run you want your heart rate to elevate accordingly to increase oxygen delivery
It often occurs due to an increase in sympathetic tone or a decrease in parasympathetic tone
The most important causes include exercise
Pain anxiety
Fever
Hypovolemia
Because when intravascular volume is depleted by a hemorrhage or dehydration
Stroke volume Falls causing cardiac output to fall
Since there isn't enough volume your heart can't really improve stroke volume so it increases heart rate to improve cardiac output causing
Sinus tachycardia
If low-risk for CHF give IV fluids in the tachycardia May resolve
Other causes are hypotension
Hypoxia
Hypoglycemia
Hyperthyroidism
Anemia sepsis
Pulmonary embolism
Stimulants
Such as nicotine caffeine and cocaine
Alcohol or benzodiazepine withdrawal
Medication such as amphetamines anticholinergic SAR others
Pain medication withdrawal specifically beta blocker
Pathologic sinus tachycardia can cause palpitations but is often asymptomatic
However significant tachycardia in a patient with pre-existing heart disease may cause a worsening of their condition
Systole is a fixed entity
So when your heart rate increases is because diastole has been cut short
This means a decrease in both coronary artery filling time and ventricular filling
The rapid rate also causes an increase in myocardial oxygen demand
Does a patient with coronary artery atherosclerosis who becomes
Tachycardic may experience angina or dyspnea
Treatment should be targeted at the underlying etiology
For example if a patient is writhing in pain from kidney stone and you noticed that he or she is tachycardic
Treating the pain with analgesic
Should causes tachycardia to resolve
Although giving a beta blocker would make the vital signs look better on the monitor frankly this would be bad medicine because it would do nothing to help the patient
This would be treating the number rather than treating them
If a tachycardia is a physiological response to something then it may be necessary to maintain adequate cardiac output
Similarly
If someone with a GI bug has persistent vomiting and diarrhea with tachycardia then give fluids for their suspected hypovolemia and the tiger
Call you should resolve
Most commonly
Patient is nervous in the Ed and they have tachycardia
Wait until they come down in the tachycardia May resolve
Infants and young children can have normal heart rates up to 160 beats per minute
It can be alarmed when you also take such a rapid rate but don't mistake
Healthy Pediatric